All right, let me guess. You're ready to
start creating some jaw-dropping
animations like this. However, after
downloading your 3D model, importing it
into Blender, and trying to animate it,
you notice that you can't actually move
any of its joints, but only its
position, rotation, and scale. Well,
unless you're content with your model
just floating motionless throughout your
scene like some sort of lifeless action
figure, in order to get actual joint
movement out of your character, you're
going to need what's called a rig, which
is essentially a digital skeleton that
can be used to puppet your model. Okay,
now how the heck do you create a digital
skeleton? Well, there's several
different methods, so sit tight, boot up
Blender, and let's begin.
Okay, so the hardest, yet most versatile
method to creating a rig in Blender is
to simply do it from scratch in Blender
itself. This method is particularly
useful when you have a model that has
unorthodox proportions that require
custom rigs as opposed to auto-generated
rigs, which we will cover later in this
tutorial. For this tutorial, we will
just create a basic human rig, which,
assuming you passed middle school
biology class and know what a skeleton
looks like, should be pretty easy to
make. To create custom rig, simply go to
edit mode and add a bone, then position
and scale it so it sits in the middle of
your model and covers the length of the
body. Also, make sure to go to the
armature settings and select in front so
you can actually see the bones inside
the mesh. Then, subdivide this bone a
few times by right clicking and
selecting subdivide, and boom, now we
have a spine. After this, you can select
the edge of one of the spine bones and
click E to extrude yourself a neck and E
again to create a head bone. We will use
this extruding method for the rest of
the extremities, such as the arms and
legs. However, since the arms and legs
are the exact same on each side of the
model, it would be stupid to create a
bone structure for each arm and leg
individually. Instead, we can make
Blender do the other half of the work
for us by going to the tool tab and
clicking X mirror axis. Now, if we click
on the central spine bone and extrude
using Shift E instead of E, we can see
that Blender creates identical bones on
either half of the model, meaning and we
can just create arm and leg bones for
one side of the model while Blender
automatically creates mirror bones on
the other side. Also, when creating your
skeleton, you may end up creating some
bones that are unnecessary. If that's
the case, don't be afraid to go WWE on
those bones and obliterate them using
the delete button. In most cases, the
important bones will stay connected to
each other. However, if they become
disconnected, you can just reconnect
them by selecting the two bones,
clicking control P, and parenting them
to each other while keeping the offset.
All right, so once you got your skeleton
finished, the next step is to pair our
mesh to our rig. By doing this, we are
essentially telling Blender that we want
the rig to dictate the orientation,
position, and scale of the vertices of
our mesh. Anyway, to do this, you're
going to need to first select your
model, then your rig, then click control
P, and select automatic weights. What
are weights, you may ask? Well, without
getting too technical, weights are
essentially Blender's way of dictating
whether or not a certain bone in our rig
will affect a certain part of our mesh
and how strongly it will affect it. For
example, if you wanted the head bone to
control the head of our mesh, we would
use weights to tell Blender that we want
the head bone to control our head and
only the head as opposed to the other
parts of the body. Weights are usually
depicted using colors with red
corresponding to the area that we want
the bone to control, and blue
corresponding to the area that we don't
want the bone to control. Luckily,
Blender can actually do this process for
us automatically if we click automatic
weights when parenting. So, let's just
click that and let Blender do its thing.
Hold up. Wait a minute. Something ain't
right.
Oh, yeah. I forgot to mention that
Blender's automatic weight feature only
works like 50% of the time. However,
there are a couple methods that can be
used to get it to work. For one, after
selecting our mesh, we can go to edit
mode, mesh, clear, and merge by
distance. Doing this cleans a few things
up in our mesh, and in most cases,
allows Blender to do its thing. So,
let's try again, and
Uh, okay. If it still doesn't work, the
next best thing we could do is simplify
our mesh by deleting some vertices. To
do this, go to the modifier tab, and
let's add a decimate modifier to our
mesh. Then, by manipulating the slider
here, we can slowly begin to reduce the
face count of our mesh. You want to
reduce the face count as much as you can
before you start seeing actual
deformations in your mesh. Once done,
you can click apply and cross your
fingers as you try to parent again.
Okay, with that done, we can now go to
pose mode and check if the weights
turned out okay by moving one of the
bones.
So, yeah, Blender's automatic weight
feature isn't always perfect. That's why
we're going to have to clean that up a
bit manually. To do this, select your
mesh, then go to the weight paint
editor. Then, we can go to the vertex
panel and select the name of the bone
that's giving us issues. As we can see
by the weight map, it seems Blender has
left some of the areas around the bone
blue when they should be red, which is
why they aren't following the bone
properly. To add weight to this area, go
to brush, then select the add brush,
then paint the area that needs more
weight. And boom, problem solved. Now,
all you need to do is continue that
process until the whole mesh is properly
weighted.
One eternity later.
Cool. Now, with our mesh properly
weighted, we should pretty much have a
working rig. However, you may notice
that's a little tricky to use. Like, in
order to get the hand in a certain
location, we have to move the shoulder
bone, then the forearm bone, then the
hand bone. Wouldn't it be nice just to
move the hand bone and have the other
bones move into the correct orientations
automatically? Well, that's where
inverse kinematics comes in.
Essentially, inverse kinematics is just
a fancy technical term that means we can
change the location of the last bone in
a chain, such as the hands or feet, the
computer automatically determine the
orientation of the other bones in the
chain. Sound good? All right, to do
this, we first need to go to pose mode
and select the bone that's the parent of
the bone we want to control the IK chain
with. In the case of the arms, that
would be the forearm bone. Then, we can
add the IK constraint and select the
armature to be our target. Now, it's
going to want us to select a bone in the
armature to control the IK rig with,
which would be the hand in this case.
However, right now the hand bone is
parented to the forearm and we actually
want our control bone to be independent
of the other bones in the arm chain
since it will be the one controlling
them. One easy way to do this is go to
edit mode and duplicate the hand bone,
then unparent the duplicate by clicking
Alt P. After doing that, we can go back
to the constraint and select our
duplicated hand bone. Additionally, we
can go down to the chain length and set
it to two in order to tell Blender that
we only want our control bone to control
the arm chain of the rig. Now, if you go
to pose mode and start playing around
with the control bone, you can actually
see we have something that works.
However, as of right now, we can't
actually control where the elbow bends.
Luckily for us, the IK constraint has an
extra little function called pull
target, which will allow us to use a
bone to control where the IK constraint
bends the arm bones. Thus, similar to
what we did with the control bone, we
duplicate the hand bone, unparent it,
and this time move it to the general
location where the arm bends naturally,
which in this case would be behind our
character. After doing that, you can go
back to the constraint and select this
bone as the pull target.
Oh, yeah. And if your arm bends in a
weird way after doing that, just mess
with the pull angle until you get it
back to normal. Now, all you need to do
is repeat this process for the other arm
and leg chains, and you'll have an
intuitive and easy-to-use rig to animate
your character with.
All right. So, although the previous
method is incredibly time-consuming,
you're usually guaranteed the best
results from doing it since you yourself
are doing most of the work to ensure
everything is rigged properly. However,
let's say you're running low on time and
you need something a little quicker, or
maybe you're just too lazy to rig your
whole character from scratch. Well,
that's when Rigify comes in. You see,
although it might sound like a name for
a construction-themed Pokémon, Rigify is
actually an add-on in Blender that gives
you a base skeleton to work with, which,
with the click of a button, can be
turned into a professional character rig
with inverse kinematics and all the
bells and whistles you need for
animation. To access it, simply go to
preferences and enable the Rigify
add-on. Then, if you click on the add
button and go down to armature, you'll
see that Rigify has added some new
options for us to choose from.
Obviously, if you have a humanoid model,
you're going to want to choose human
meta rig. Additionally, they also offer
a quadruped rig for animals or any other
four-legged abomination your heart
desires. Anyway, once you click on that,
you can see that Blender adds a human
skeleton for us. Now, all we need to do
is hop into edit mode and line up the
skeleton with our model. In the case of
our production crate model here, all we
really need to do is scale up the rig a
bit and rotate the arms of the rig from
a T-pose position to an A-pose position
so that they match the model. Then, we
can fiddle around with the fingers,
head, and legs a bit so that they line
up as well. Oh, yeah, and make sure to
turn on X mirror axis for this so that
you only have to edit one side of the
rig and have Blender do the other side
for you. Also, if some of the bones
aren't necessary for your model, such as
the face bones, then feel free to hop
over to the armature tab and make the
layer that has those bones invisible so
that you don't have to deal with them.
All right, now here's the cool part.
Remember all that work we did to get the
custom rig to work with inverse
kinematics? Well, with Rigify, all you
need to do is boom, BAM, POW.
YEP, AND THERE IT IS. YOUR INVERSE
kinematics rig is all set up and ready
to go. Now, all we need to do is parent
it to our model and we are done.
Okay, now let's say you have like no
time at all. Like when you missed your
alarm by an hour so you had to brush
your teeth and eat breakfast in the
shower, then drive to work like it was
Fast and the Furious just to make it in
time. That's the kind of time crunch
we're talking about here. Well, what if
I told you there's one method that's
even quicker than Rigify? May I present
mixamo.com.
Basically, Mixamo do literally
everything we covered before
automatically, and it even has tons of
custom mocap animations you can apply to
your model once it's rigged. All you
need to do is get yourself an active
Adobe account and ID, upload your model
to the site, tell Adobe where the major
joints of your model are, then let it do
its thing.
You can then apply an animation to it or
just download it as is, import it into
Blender, and boom, a rigged model in
minutes. Seems too good to be true,
right? Well, unfortunately, if you look
a little closer, you may notice one
issue.
Yeah, the rig doesn't have any inverse
kinematics.
But luckily, Blender's got your back
because if you go to adobe.com and look
in the plugin section, you'll find that
Adobe has a Mixamo plugin for Blender.
Once installed into Blender as an
add-on, this plugin works pretty much
the same as Rigify, where you can select
your rig, find the Mixamo tab, click
create control rig, then attempt not to
cry as you look upon your perfectly
rigged model.
And there you have it, three methods to
rig a model using Blender. Now, go use
that rig to create the cinematic
animations you've always dreamed of.
Or you could just do stupid stuff like
this.